README.md, before:

# OVault
A python library for accessing and editing your [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md) vault.

Check out the [examples](https://github.com/BalderHolst/ovault/tree/main/examples)!

## Install
```bash
pip install ovault
```

## Example
```python
import ovault

v = ovault.Vault("path/to/vault")

print()
print("path        :", v.path)
print("notes       :", len(v.notes()))
print("attachments :", len(v.attachments()))
print("tags        :", v.tags())
```

## Features

#### Vault Management

##### Indexing
- **Indexing:** Automatically indexes all notes and attachments within the vault upon initialization.
- **Ignored Files:** Respects and parses `.vault-ignore` files to exclude specified paths during indexing.
- **Dangling Links:** Identify and list links within your notes that point to non-existent files.

#### Note Handling

##### Access & Properties
- **Access Notes & Attachments:** Retrieve all notes or attachments in the vault as Python objects.
- **Note Properties:** Access key information for each note, including its full path, relative path, name, character length, associated tags, internal links, and backlinks.
- **Content Access:** Read the raw content of any note.
- **Frontmatter Extraction:** Easily retrieve YAML frontmatter from notes.
##### Modification
- **Dynamic Note Modification:** Programmatically insert text into notes at specific character positions, or intelligently before/after recognized markdown tokens.

#### Tag Management
##### Querying Tags
- **List All Tags:** Get a complete list of all unique tags present across your entire vault.
- **Filter by Tag:** Efficiently retrieve all notes associated with a specific tag.

#### Markdown Parsing & Tokenization
##### Token Representation
- **Rich Token Representation:** Notes are parsed into a detailed stream of `Token` objects, representing various markdown elements.
- **Available Tokens**:
    - **Headers:** (`# Heading`)
    - **Tags:** (`#tag`)
    - **Code Blocks:** (fenced code, `inline code`)
    - **Quotes:** (`> Quote`)
    - **Math:** (`$inline$` and `$$display$$` LaTeX)
    - **Dividers:** (`---`)
    - **Callouts:** (`> [!type] Title`)
    - **Plain Text:**
    - **Frontmatter:** (YAML metadata)
    - **Internal Links:** (`[[Note Name]]`, `![[Image.png]]`)
    - **External Links:** (`[link text](url)`, `![image alt](url)`)
    - **TemplaterCommand**: (`<% code goes here %>`)


## Development

### Build for Testing
```bash
maturin develop --release --features python
```

### Test
```bash
./test.sh
```

### Build Documentation
```bash
pip install pdoc3
./docs/build.py
```

### Release
1. Bump version in `Cargo.toml`
2. Commit change and push
3. Create a git tag with the same version: `git tag <version>`
4. Push new tag: `git push --tags`

Commit message:

Move python dev dependencies to pyproject.toml

README.md, after:

# OVault
A python library for accessing and editing your [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md) vault.

Check out the [examples](https://github.com/BalderHolst/ovault/tree/main/examples)!

## Install
```bash
pip install ovault
```

## Example
```python
import ovault

v = ovault.Vault("path/to/vault")

print()
print("path        :", v.path)
print("notes       :", len(v.notes()))
print("attachments :", len(v.attachments()))
print("tags        :", v.tags())
```

## Features

#### Vault Management

##### Indexing
- **Indexing:** Automatically indexes all notes and attachments within the vault upon initialization.
- **Ignored Files:** Respects and parses `.vault-ignore` files to exclude specified paths during indexing.
- **Dangling Links:** Identify and list links within your notes that point to non-existent files.

#### Note Handling

##### Access & Properties
- **Access Notes & Attachments:** Retrieve all notes or attachments in the vault as Python objects.
- **Note Properties:** Access key information for each note, including its full path, relative path, name, character length, associated tags, internal links, and backlinks.
- **Content Access:** Read the raw content of any note.
- **Frontmatter Extraction:** Easily retrieve YAML frontmatter from notes.
##### Modification
- **Dynamic Note Modification:** Programmatically insert text into notes at specific character positions, or intelligently before/after recognized markdown tokens.

#### Tag Management
##### Querying Tags
- **List All Tags:** Get a complete list of all unique tags present across your entire vault.
- **Filter by Tag:** Efficiently retrieve all notes associated with a specific tag.

#### Markdown Parsing & Tokenization
##### Token Representation
- **Rich Token Representation:** Notes are parsed into a detailed stream of `Token` objects, representing various markdown elements.
- **Available Tokens**:
    - **Headers:** (`# Heading`)
    - **Tags:** (`#tag`)
    - **Code Blocks:** (fenced code, `inline code`)
    - **Quotes:** (`> Quote`)
    - **Math:** (`$inline$` and `$$display$$` LaTeX)
    - **Dividers:** (`---`)
    - **Callouts:** (`> [!type] Title`)
    - **Plain Text:**
    - **Frontmatter:** (YAML metadata)
    - **Internal Links:** (`[[Note Name]]`, `![[Image.png]]`)
    - **External Links:** (`[link text](url)`, `![image alt](url)`)
    - **TemplaterCommand**: (`<% code goes here %>`)


## Development
Install `ovault` and development dependencies with
```bash
pip install -e ".[dev]"
```

### Build for Testing
```bash
maturin develop --release --features python
```

### Test
```bash
./test.sh
```

### Build Documentation
```bash
./docs/build.py
```

### Release
1. Bump version in `Cargo.toml`
2. Commit change and push
3. Create a git tag with the same version: `git tag <version>`
4. Push new tag: `git push --tags`
